ESGF WRF Lateral Boundary Conditions extractor
==============================================

This tool extracts boundary conditions from Global Climate Models (GCMs) stored
under the Earth System Grid Federation (ESGF) Data Reference Syntax (DRS) to
nest a regional climate model (RCM). Initially developed for the
[Weather Research and Forecasting](https://www.mmm.ucar.edu/weather-research-and-forecasting-model)
(WRF) model, its filter processing system could, in principle, be adapted or
extended to provide suitable input for other RCMs.

Main features
-------------

While the ESGF has provided a common data and metadata format for the storage
of GCM output data, the access to RCM boundary data from the ESGF is still
hampered by the granularity of datasets and files, the frecuency of the
available data, the masking of the fields, their units, or the final format
required for a given RCM. In this context, this tool provides:

 * Cropping of the global fields, leading to a downweight of the files to be
   downloaded of about one order of magnitude (e.g. for the EURO-CORDEX
   domain).
 * Temporal interpolation to fill data gaps 
 * Masking of sea-only and land-only fields
 * Format transformations (e.g. to GRIB, as required by the WRF WPS)
 * Fixing of the model level coordinates for the GRIB format
 * Units transformation
 * Management of alternative sources for mandatory input initial conditions

This is **NOT** a user tool. It is designed to run by the data, on a machine
with local access to model data following the ESGF DRS (i.e. typically, an ESGF
node).

Usage
-----

The main script to convert ESGF DRS data to a format readable by the WRF
Preprocessing System is `preprocessor.ESGF`:

```bash
preprocessor.ESGF STARTDATE ENDDATE DRSBASEPATH BCTABLE
```

where:

 * *STARTDATE* and *ENDDATE* delimit the time period to be retrieved, formatted
   as e.g. 2033-12-24T00:00:00

 * *DRSBASEPATH* is the path to a directory containing model data for a
   particular GCM. It should point to the directory where the
   `<experiment>/<frequency>/<realm>/...` structure lives.

 * *BCTABLE* is an ASCII text formatted file, specifying the variables to read
   and how to process them (see [README_BCtable](README_BCtable.md)).

The output generated by this script consists of a new directory `BCdata`
located in the current working directory and containing the data retrieved and
processed.

Contents
--------

The package includes, apart from **preprocessor.ESGF**, which is the main
script to convert ESGF DRS data to a format readable by the WRF Preprocessing
System, the following files:

**BCtable.[tag]**
:  are sample BCtable files for specific GCMs. They provide additional details
   of a particular GCM run for `preprocessor.ESGF`. See
   [README_BCtable](README_BCtable.md) file for details on the syntax of these
   files.

**prep.sh**
:  Sample driving script that calls the preprocessor and runs WRF chain

**WRF/ungrib/Variable_Tables/Vtable.[tag]**
:  are sample Vtable files (standard WRF Preprocessing System files)

**util/**
:  Utilities to manage the tool tests

**util/clean_WRF_dir.sh TAG**
:  Moves WPS/WRF output to a `WRF.[TAG]` directory and cleans the test `WRF` dir.

Requirements
------------

**Climate Data Operators (CDO)**
:  This tool is available at https://code.mpimet.mpg.de/projects/cdo. It can be
   installed via `conda install -c conda-forge cdo`. The tool has been tested
   with cdo v1.9.6 (20190208)

**WRF/**
:  Directory with minimal amount of files to run WRF.  In the sample script
   `prep.sh`, this directory is populated by the `wrf_skel` command available
   after `use wrf381`.

Project workflow
----------------
Development follows Git-flow with branches:

 * __master__ as release-only branch
 * __devel__ as main development branch, allowing only merges from task-specific branches

TO-DO
-----
 
 [ ] Improve land-sea masking to extend fields such as SST towards the
     coastline of the RCM higher resolution landmask.

 [ ] Improve soil data processing filters. They are currently ad-hoc for
     specific models.

Acknowledgements
----------------

This work is funded by the Copernicus Climate Change Service service contract
2017/C3S_34B_Lot1_CNRS/SC2 (CORDEX4CDS).
